writing/bbqbike/manifesto.wiki
Last modified: Tue Jun 23, 2020  08:13PM

# BBQBicycle Manifesto notes


## Draft 1

I find riding a bicycle to be among life's great pleasures because
I am, fundamentally, a very lazy daydreamer. Lazy daydreaming is
probably not the thing most often associated with bicycling, but that
is because of an image of bicycling that has been created by cycling's
most outspoken proponents --- racers and bike nerds. However most of
the people doing most of the actual riding are lazy daydreamers. This
series of essays is for the lazy daydreaming cyclist, or those who would
like to be. The whole package can be summed up with the idea of the
BBQBicycle --- low and slow is the way to go. Low and slow, because it's
the easy way to ride a bike. And low and slow because if you aren't
trying to ride faster than someone else, or beat your previous best
time, you can take the time on your bicycle to let your mind wander, to
let things stew. What you'll find is this can be a wholly-absorbing,
creative, problem-solving endeavor. Riding becomes thinking. And as a
bonus, you'll probably get some kind of fitness benefits from all that
riding too.

Over decades of daily riding, I have found myself diverging from the
way other bicycle riders approach bicycles and riding. I've never been
interested in racing, mountain biking, bmx, or trials riding. 
Daily bike commuting is lovely, but it's more of convenience than a 
pure pleasure. Real pleasure is found in riding alone on long day rides
up to 8-12 hours on the bike, and sometimes multi-day or week-long
self-supported bicycle tours. 

[//]: # (re-write this)
Riding alone is better for many reasons:
I like the independence and challenge of being self-supported, which
is based on my own confidence in my ability to fix anything that goes
wrong with my bicycle; I like that in certain times like a pandemic
riding alone is a safer activity; but mostly I like riding alone because
other people will distract your from your daydreaming, and other people
might pressure you to ride faster than your comfortable pace, and thus
distract your from your laziness.

BBQBicycle puts aside all the baggage that the bicycle industry, and the
bicycle nerds have loaded onto bicycling. Bicycling is so much bigger
and more important than spandex-clad racing, or feats of super-human
endurance and technical skill, or human-powered eco-alternatives.
Cycling is bigger than any bicycle "culture" --- in the way that cars
are bigger than car culture. Many bicycle culture pursuits are indeed
cool, but two-wheeled vehicles are endowed with a kind of magic, and
bicycles are the most essential form of that magic. That magic is there
for everyone, you just need to grab hold of it. And don't be distracted
or dissuaded by the way fitness bros or unrepentant nerds approach
bicycles. They know bicycles are magic too, but BBQBicycle is here to
help find your own way into that magic, not theirs. You don't need to
partake in cycling culture to love riding.

This series is intended to take someone from having not ridden since
they were a kid to being a daily rider who is excited to spend many
hours on a bicycle. There's a lot for someone who is already an active
cyclist to consider (or reconsider) too, and that person should skip
the stuff for beginners. Step 1 will move into practical steps to take
to get you riding. But first, I want to lay out the philosophical
principles behind BBQBicycle --- a kind of BBQBicycle manifesto.

	1. Laziness:
		* Cycling is extremely easy, the irony is it's so easy that we can make it insanely hard on ourselves.
		* BBQBicycle's basic principle is to AVOID making it hard on ourselves, keep it easy
	2. Daydreaming and thinking
	3. Independence and self-sufficiency:
		* Carry what you need to take care of yourself.
	4. Pure mechanical joy and the magic of two-wheeled vehicles
		* Like the mice on the wheel --- a pure, mechanical pleasure
			* [conan-mice-bicycles](conan-mice-bicycles)
	5. And yes, strength and fitness. You shape the bicycle, and the bicycle shapes you.



