steps-to-riding-your-bike-and-loving-it.txt
Last modified: 2024-04-07 13:43



1. go on vacation, somewhere without cars, ride a cruiser, love it.

2. ride to work in nice weather (even if, especially if, you live in a
small town or the ride is kinda long) Wear a helmet - if it makes you
more likely to ride.

3. ride to work in bad weather (it's easier than you think) Get the
right gear. The whole experience is a game about getting the gear right.
Before we had cars, this was just part of everyone's daily life. Most
of us have lost this sense of "gear" and equipping ourselves. Which is
ironic because with weather prediction today we can be a LOT better
about being ready for the weather coming at us. [write a lesson on
how to read weather reports?] A lot of this is about getting to know
your body. Many people think they need to be warm from the moment they
go outside in cold weather. But as you get more experience, you'll
realize that being a little cold when you go outside means you'll warm
up while yu ride to a perfect temperature. If you go out warm, you'll
probably end up too hot. This is both an important lesson for practical
experience for spending time outside, but also kinda a metaphor for life
in general - it's not always the best to be the most comfortable right
_now_.

4. ride for recreation ride with a group, maybe. (a supported ride? with
a club?)

5. become a mechanic - bikes are delicate unlike cars. you need to know
how to fix them, sorry.

6. go on a bike tour - this is everything wrapped up in a few days.

7. Learn to love riding up giant hills. They reward you with slow
pleasures. Bicycles can be fun, and you should by all means seek fun.
But they can also be a _pleasure_, which is not the same as fun. [see
riding and thinking]

Bonus: Consider becoming a bike commuter. [Eventually, with enough
experience you can just tell by the sound what kind of vehicle or driver
is coming up behind you. Or, you can tell by the way a car approaches
a light which way it's going to turn even without a signal. As robot
cars come into play this will become even more obvious - a lot like
understanding a video game.]

People are conditioned to getting on a vehicle and telling it to go. (I
hardly fault them for this, after all we have a tradition now stretching
back hundreds of years where our vehicles are powered by some force
that is not us.) But this conditioning does not serve you well with
a bicycle. You need to rethink your relationship to this particular
vehicle: for _you_ are the most significant part of the vehicle. You are
not just the motor, but also the mechanism by which the machine balances
and turns. This machine is nothing without you on it. (Think about it:
There's no way to make a remote-controlled bicycle that isn't actually a
motorcycle.)

The conditioning to press a button (or crack a whip) and zoom off means
that many people get on a bike, give a couple of pedal strokes, and
coast, sort of subconsciously hoping that the bicycle will do the rest
of the work for you. (And, given how efficient of a machine the bicycle
is, it's not wrong to think of the bike as doing a lot of the work for
you!) I think this is behind the popularity of e-bikes: _finally_ a
bike that actually DOES just take off with a few pedal strokes! But
if you think of yourself as part of the machine --- the part that is
powering the machine -- you start to understand that actually what you
want to do is provide near-continuous small amounts of power, with only
occasional coasting down a hill or along a flat at top speed, just like
a car would.

Minimal pedaling a coasting along are just fine (and pleasant!) if
you are just doing an oceanside ride on a boardwalk, but if you want
to get anywhere you need to start pedaling more. Not like you need to
push yourself until you are the edge of your capabilities, but for
actually traveling somewhere by bicycle, and for making it an effective
exercise, you need to pedal at about the same exertion level as going
on a reasonable walk. Basically, you should only be coasting when you
are slowing down, or traveling downhill. Any time you can put some
effort into the pedals, you should be turning them. The problem is that
bike riding is SO easy, that people get on their bike and expect to put
out the same energy as driving a car --- which is none. Remember that
you want to be putting out the same energy as a moderate walk. And the
magic of a bicycle is that it will turn that moderate walk energy into a
travel distance equivalent to, if not more than, a car (in a dense city
anyway).

On breaking a sweat: You really shouldn't be worried about this. Or
being sweaty when you arrive at work. If you are breaking a sweat, you
are riding too fast. Just slow down. You shouldn't break any more of
a sweat when you ride to work than if you walked a mile or two.
(Unless you really want to turn your bike into serious exercise, which
is fine, but totally unnecessary for getting around on your bike.)
Three exceptions to the just ride slower rule: 1. on a hot day, you're
going to be sweaty. So is everyone else. If you had walked to work you
would be sweaty too. This isn't the bicycle's fault, don't associate
it with the bicycle, associate it with the heat. 2. You might be so
out of shape that even a moderate walk causes you to break a sweat. If
this is the case you have a problem that is much bigger than just
arriving sweaty at work. You need to get in shape or you are going to
die. Arriving sweaty at work is the least of your problems, and if you
start riding (or walking) to work you should overcome this pretty
soon. 3. You might just be a very sweaty person. Some people are. In
this case you are one of the small portion of people who might
actually benefit from a shower after you arrive at work. If you are
THAT sweaty you might want to consider this even if you drive your car
in.


