writing/bbqbike/bbqbike.wiki
Last modified: 2025-07-10 17:43


# BBQBicycle --- Sections and notes

## Drafts:
* [BBQBicycle-first_draft-free_sections](BBQBicycle-first_draft-free_sections)

## Notes:
* Things to add from 2022 riding around and thinking about this:
	* not just the technical aspects of how the bike should be built
	* but also the _spirit_ of bbq: sitting around drinking beer, maybe smoking a cigar (I'm not saying you SHOULD do these things while riding your bicycle, but that could COULD.)
	* Relaxed riding, daydreaming, the freedom of mind that comes from having a simple outdoor task (bbq, riding) that doesn't take too much effort and allows your mind to wander.
	* Too many people, both inexperienced and experienced riders, think riding is about strenuous exercise. Which it can be if you make it that. But it can also be about spending many hours straight on a nice day outside toodling along. Just like sitting next to a smoker and tending the meat... ideally you have a friend doing that for dinner when you get home!
* Decide if you want to have a tone of directly addressing the reader ("you") or more generalized. (More generalized would feel more like a manifesto. But maybe would be less accessible.)
* More people looking for a cheap way to exercise?
* perhaps even more of an audience/demand than for cities?
	not quite the demand for food writing, but it's there?
	On the other hand, there are already a lot of bicycle writers out there
	On the plus side, this stuff should be easy to write, and can be used as published examples for applying to jobs
* Add this to notes in writing todos, or meta, wherever that stuff is about food writers
* Lines beginging with a + [ ] are actual sentence framings
* Ideally, each of these should be about 700 words
	* ~2.5 minutes to read 700 words
	* 10 minutes to read 2000 words
* Logo: a person riding a steel bike with a basket and a saddlebag and 1-1 gear uphill
* Put a short paragraph at the top (of every entry?) That explains the idea and links to the TOC. And brands the concept.
* Our sense of bicycles is warped by cars, and you need to un-warp it:
	* People who rarely ride bikes often get on a bicycle and start peddaling and then sort-of instinctively expect the bike to do the work. Then they coast for a bit, and are almost shocked or even resentful that they have to pedal again. It's not a car (and hopefully not an personal e-vehicle), it's like walking: you have to keep pedaling almost continuously.
	* On the other end, people who ride regularly have almost an instinctive desire to go at the speed of traffic. Instead of finding a nice easy cadence (about the same effort as a walk -- especially in hot weather!) they push on until they are moving with the effort of a brisk run (and sweating like a hog).
* The trick to hot weather is to ride slower:
	* keep the effort to a minimum
	* Even slow riding will only make a 5-10 minute difference to a half-hour commute. Worth leaving slightly earlier to arrive not drenched in sweat!
	* Unlike walking or running, On a bicycle you get a big return in breeze for a slight output in effort -- it's actually perfect for heat.
* The trick to cold weather is goggles, gloves, and a windbreaker over wooly layers.
	* Maybe a few other bits of gear
	* keep a set of chemical handwarmers in your bag in winter!
	* Avoid 30-40 degrees raining or sleet. Snow is mostly fine, (until it isn't).
	* Ride faster to get warmer!


## Sections:

### A BBQBicycle manifesto
by: Rotwang
* [manifesto](manifesto) notes
+ [ ] This series isn't about gear (though I probably will touch on some gear once in a while)
	+ It is about peeling back the culture and preconceptions surrounding bicycles, and plug you in directly to what a bicycle actually _is_
+ [X] Bicycling works for me because I am fundamentally a lazy daydreamer.
+ [X] I've never been interested in racing, mountain biking, bmx, or trials riding. I am a daily bike commuter, but that's more out of convenience than the love of riding.
+ [X] Over decades of daily riding, I have found myself diverging from the way other bicycle riders approach bicycles and riding.
+ [X] I have landed in a place where I like to ride alone on long day rides up to 8-12 hours on the bike, and sometimes multi-day or week-long self-supported bicycle tours.
+ [X] I like to ride alone because it allows me to spend most of my time daydreaming. Having other people around distract you from your thoughts. In certain times, like a pandemic, riding alone is also good practice.
+ [X] And because I'm lazy, I want riding to be as easy as possible. 
+ [X] For that reason I daydreamed up the concept of the BBQBicycle --- low and slow is the way to go. 
+ [ ] Which is both a strategy for how to ride easy, and a mechanical principle for easy bikes to ride.
2020-06-19 11:42:57
+ [X] BBQBicycle puts aside all the baggage that the bicycle industry, and the bicycle nerds have loaded onto bicycling. Bicycling is so much bigger and more important than spandex-clad racing, or feats of super-human endurance and technical skill, or human-powered eco-alternatives. Those things might indeed be cool, but two-wheeled vehicles are endowed with a kind of magic, and bicycles are the most essential form of that magic. That magic is there for everyone, you just need to grab hold of it. And don't be distracted or dissuaded by the way fitness bros or unrepentant nerds approach bicycles. They know bicycles are magic too, but BBQBicycle is here to help find your own way into that magic, not theirs.
	* [X] Cycling is bigger than that. It's bigger than a "culture" -- in the way that cars are bigger than car culture.
	* [X] You don't need to partake in cycling culture to love riding.
+ [ ] On a bicycle you are flying along just above the ground, your whole being held aloft on two tiny patches of rubber
	+ It's amazing that it works at all. It's truly magical that it _wants_ to work -- you don't have to fight the bicycle the whole time to stay up.
		+ If you doubt this, try riding in deep slippery snow or sand sometimes -- it's possible, but you have to _fight_ it the whole time. Seems like it's just chance of the universe (or magic) that makes it so riding isn't like that all the time.
	+ This is why bicycles were discovered, not invented. The _form_ existed already -- determined by the magic of physics -- we just had to figure it out.
		+ It's possible to build a bicycle of a form where you do have to fight it the whole time.
		+ The form the bicycle has was carved out of physics as they exist
	+ And now you have this amazing magical thing in your life every day, and you don't even think about it.
+ [X] This series is intended to take someone from having not ridden since they were a kid to being a daily rider who is excited to spend many hours on a bicycle. There's a lot for someone who is already an active cyclist to consider (or reconsider) too, and that person should skip the stuff for beginners. Step 1 will move into practical steps to take to get you riding. But first, I want to lay out the philosophical principles behind BBQBicycle --- a kind of BBQBicycle manifesto.
	1. Laziness:
		* Cycling is extremely easy, the irony is it's so easy that we can make it insanely hard on ourselves.
		* BBQBicycle's basic principle is to AVOID making it hard on ourselves, keep it easy
	2. Daydreaming and thinking
	3. Independence and self-sufficiency:
		* Carry what you need to take care of yourself.
	4. Pure mechanical joy and the magic of two-wheeled vehicles
		* Like the mice on the wheel --- a pure, mechanical pleasure
			* [conan-mice-bicycles](conan-mice-bicycles)
	5. And yes, strength and fitness. You shape the bicycle, and the bicycle shapes you.


### Step 1: go on vacation
* Go somewhere with a beach community that has beach cruisers you can ride
* Ride a heavy old rusty beach cruiser everywhere. Appreciate how awesome it is.
* Imagine taking that sense of independence and mobility home with you --- there's no reason you can't have this at home!


### Riding and thinking
* [riding-and-thinking](riding-and-thinking) notes
* Before getting into the HOW, start with the WHY
* Riding allows daydreaming --- as long as you are comfortable
* But if you go out with the intention to work through a specific problem, it is a perfect time to focus on one, and can lead to clever solutions.
* (Most of these essays were written in my head while riding)
* https://www.theatlantic.com/culture/archive/2020/10/mary-cappello-lecture-jenny-odell-how-to-do-nothing-distraction-learning/616649/


* Mouse on the wheel -- love of mechanical pleasure here?
	* Or maybe it goes in Riding and Thinking? A physical corollary to mental relaxation? 
	* Or maybe it's its own essay


### Low and slow is the way to go
* You can ride ANY distance like this
	* The difference between riding fast and riding slow is only a couple of hours out of a long day (show the math)
	* But you still need to pedal
* [steps-to-riding-your-bike-and-loving-it](steps-to-riding-your-bike-and-loving-it)


### What bike should you ride?
* You probably already have some dumpy old bike --- that can be a bbq bike
* Start basic, just ride your old bike.
* Eventually, like bbq, you can start getting fancy and customizing


### What you need to know before you go
* Almost nothing!
* Your first rides will be short. If anything goes wrong, walk home!
	* You don't NEED to know anything.
	* Anyone can ride 10 miles, and if you make it a 5 mile out-and-back, the worst that could happen is you have to walk a long way home.
* Eventually you want to learn:
	* How to change a flat (It's more complicated than it should be)
	* Lube your chain
	* How to adjust barrel adjusters.
* Making a plan for longer rides:
	* Bring a cellphone! Call in 4-wheeler support if the worst happens
	* In a city with a subway system that allows you to bring bikes on, don't wander too far from stops you could take home.
	* Learn to change a flat, and bring flat-fixing tools (maybe a few hex wrenches for making adjustments, but mostly I don't)


### How to check the weather
* Radar in motion for right now
* Forecast for tomorrow or the next day
	* Don't just look at the icons
	* Also check the wind prediction
* See #3: [steps-to-riding-your-bike-and-loving-it](steps-to-riding-your-bike-and-loving-it)


### How to choose a route
* Google maps
* cue sheets --- simplify your route
* Bitch-in-the-box?
* Back roads vs shouldered numbered roads
* No road is that bad --- except for the ones that are (long island) --- dense suburban is the worst, compared to country roads to dense cities


### Basic gear
* tools
	* Ask your local bike shop to set you up 
* Don't carry stuff on your back
* basket
* water bottle
* What to wear
	* Not spandex (only beautiful people look good in spandex, and they look good _despite_ spandex, not because of it)
	* Bike shorts for the padding --- under a skirt, if your butt hurts

### Sweating
* See on breaking a sweat in:
	* [steps-to-riding-your-bike-and-loving-it](steps-to-riding-your-bike-and-loving-it)
* They cool you as you generate heat while riding, unlike shitty jogging or hiking.
* Even if you break a sweat on a climb, you'll be cool on the inevitable descent.
	* There's always a descent.
	* Towns built in valleys to be near water sources --- always a climb back up out of a town.


### Rain gear
* Rain cape?
* Umbrella?
* Let your feet get wet --- rubber boots if it's cold, shoes that can get wet if it's warm.
* Prepare to go out: anticipate getting warmer by BEING cold when you first step outside


### Advanced gear
* Low single-speed or fixie setup
* Handlebars
* Saddles: just because it's squishy doesn't mean it will be comfortable
* Fenders
* Pedals


### Bicycles are magic
* We don't actually know how they work. There is the scientist at Cornell who can't explain how his bikes stay balanced.
* There is the amazing function of the wheel, how the spokes pull \emph{in} and yet somehow create something impossibly strong.
* If you get into building bicycles, you shape your ride.
* But they also shape you back --- over time you become a lean riding machine.
* The ultimate man-machine, as Kraftwerk has been trying to remind us for decades.
* Everyone appreciates the beautiful patina of a used hand tool.
* The bicycle is just like that, but for your whole body.


### Into each life some hills must rise
* Hills are about _patience_; not unrelated to daydreaming
	* If a hill is hard, it is because you are trying too hard
		* (which might be because you don't have the right gearing)
	* You have all day to ride up the hill --- but it won't take that long. Imagine how long it will take if you were walking up it --- because on a bike it will be faster than that. And it should be easier too.
	* The steeper the hill, the shorter it has to be.
* and gearing.
* Get these right, and they are easy.
* Do not exceed 60% of your heart rate --- unless you want to!
* Hills give you a chance to relax and enjoy the scenery
* Upright bicycles are _hill-climbing machines_, unlike shitting recumbants


### Bicycles and cities
* It is a little known fact that after he was freed by Heracles from the rock, \href{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prometheus}{Prometheus} returned to the temple of the gods and stole another major technology of civilization: the bicycle.
	* Our sin is that we don't recognize the bicycle for what it is, particularly with our cities
	* In a redeemed world, the bicycle would occupy exactly the same romantic place in our culture that the car does.
* Grime of cities is beautiful
* Stoplights, not so much
	* Treat stoplights like stop signs
* See 12mph.txt in dynohub staging
* See bicycle special relationship with cities in dynohub staging


### Bicycles and the hinterlands
* [This section might be the same as long day rides]


### Bicycles and sex
* [Sex sells! Nobody ever included THIS chapter in their nerdy bike book!]
* Thinking about sex on long rides
* The same physicality --- sex can be like riding
* Bikes shape you to make you hot
* People look sexy on bikes


### Death
* The roads are full of death
* And all that death attracts life. So many creatures come to the road because that's where the carcasses are.
* [This entry could be kinda baroque and grandiose in style, as a little change from friendly and accessible]


### Do you need a helmet?
* Helmet agnostic --- whatever gets you on the bike
* Swimming vs riding
* Helmets in snowsports led to MORE deaths
* I don't want to get into the whole helmet debate. Just know that it is far more complicatd than you've been led to believe, and as a single example of that check out what happened to snowsports after people started wearing helmets.
* Really, the problem with the helmet-pushers is they make the wrong thing the priority. The priority should be _riding_.
* The health benefits of riding every day _far_ outweigh the risks of riding without a helmet.
* So if you are hesitating to go out riding because you don't want to wear your helmet, you should just ride anyway and not worry about it.
* Conversely, if you find you are hesitating to go ride because you don't have or can't find your helmet and are a little fearful of riding without one, you should totally get a helmet and ride.
* Just _ride_ --- that's the priority.

### Pain
* Pain will distract you from daydreaming and thinking
* You shouldn't experience pain, if you do, make adjustments
	* Except of course that after a 8 hours in the saddle, you're going to be sore. 
* See Saddles in gear
* Raise your seat to avoid knee pain
* Don't try to get things perfect, instead set your bike up so you can change positions a lot
	* Drop or bullhorn bars (or at least bar-ends)
	* Learn to ride out of the saddle
	* Learn to love hills because they change the muscles you use
#### Comfort
* Many people make the mistake of trying to find just the _right_ piece of gear to be comfortable (on AND off the bicycle...)
* But real comfort comes from being able to shift position, use different muscles, put the load on different places:
	* Like drop bar positions
	* Standing instead of sitting when climbing
	* Shifting your foot around on the pedal
	* Riding no hands

### Exercise 
* What if you WANT to make cycling an exercise? After all, it's really good for that
* Then the only rule is: get your heart rate up
	* Stretching isn't exercise (see Outside article)
		* Yoga might be nice, but it isn't exercise
	* cycling CAN be exercise, but you have to work at it
* It's nice to build muscle too, but it's cardio that really matters for health


### Long day rides
* Pushing yourself to your limits --- but not uncomfortably
* Learn to love hills
* If you love long descents, consider motorcycles
	* What's good and bad about motorcycles --- more instant fun, more danger, get fat 
* Snacks: fritos, sunflower seeds


### Bicycle touring
* The only way to really know a place
* Biking vs hiking
	* Eating real meals with people while you spend most of the day alone
	* Real solitude --- but not lonliness
	* Cool descents
	* Not damaging your body, but still doing heavy exercise
* Camping vs b&bs
* If you've seen it from a bike, you've seen it
* Eating while riding
* Follow numbered routes because small roads google wants to send you on often dont have names
	* (Unless you have a bitch-in-a-box system)



### Get your bike tuned up
* If you ride regularly, you need to spend $200 or so a year on your bike
* Ask them to replace the brake pads
* check and change out the drive train if it needs it.
* Check and change out your tires if you need it


### Working on your bike
* Working on your bike totally isn't necessary. But there is a great pleasure that comes from working on your bike.
* One, the simple mechanical pleasure of fixing things. But even if that's not your jam...
* You also get DIRECT feedback from working on your bike. While only the most astute observer of the tachyometer will notice a change in their engine performance after changing the oil on their car, if you change your bike tires, or lube the chain, you will notice it dramatically and immediately. It's very satsifying, and makes you feel like you're getting more out of your bike.
* See the greatness of the age of mechanical things in dynohub staging


### Winter riding
* Goggles goggles goggles
* Skinny tires?
* Fenders (again)


### Mauna Kea
* Like the Dopesmoker of bicycle rides --- the lowest and the slowest
* Ride Fuji: change out front chainring to a 22t 1:1? Would that do it? Test in the catskills
* Always wanted to go to Hawaii, but didn't want to be a tourist. (Well, I AM a tourist, but of a different stripe.)
* Description of the ride from Hilo to Mauna Kea


### About me
* I earned my wings in a bicycle chopper gang. [link scul Rotwang page]
* Then I spent years trying every kind of cycling there is before I developed my own BBQBicycle style of riding.

