writing/bbqbike/riding-and-thinking.wiki
Last modified: 2024-08-31 10:16

# Riding and daydreaming notes


## First thoughts
It takes all kinds of riders to make the bike world go round.

But I'm going to recommend here that you try very long rides, not for the challenge of completeing some distance (though you can roll that in as a goal if you like) but for the opportunity to engage in a kind of clear thinking that is hard to get to in any other way.

The bicycle allows you to achieve a kind of perfect blend of daydreaming and flow.
Because you are physically active, and only challenged mentally a tiny bit, you'll find your mind wanders, but with a clarity of thought that you don't normally get.

If you do this for hours it can become a whole other kind of thing.

Go by yourself.

Start with an hour long ride - ten miles - many people commute that distance to work. try it!

Riding distances by yourself can be intimidating, learn to fix a flat and some basic mechanics, or sign up with better world club roadside assistance.

Get a comfortable bike. Note that something that might be super comfy for a mile, like a fat-tire beach cruiser will not be comfortable for 30 or 50 miles.

Sometimes if you find yourself really zoning out, it's good to put in a little sprint, or climb a hill to bring yourself back to the physical reality/challenge.

But otherwise DON'T make it a physical thing. Pedal at an easy pace. If you go 30 or 50 miles you'll get a good workout anyway so don't worry about that.

The only problem is there's no easy way to record your thoughts. Plan to stop every half hour or hour and write for a while. But plan an extra 20 minutes (or more) per stop for your trip. If you are like me it takes a while to write things down.

Why not walking? Why not driving? Why not motorcycling?

* See "generative mind wandering" in this (kinda all over the place) oped: https://www.nytimes.com/2024/08/31/opinion/household-labor-work-laundry-faith.html



